A Novel Online Signature Verification System Based on GMM Features in a DTW Framework
Abhishek Sharma,Suresh Sundaram
sureshsundaram@iitg.ernet.in).

Abstract
This paper presents a novel online signature verification system based on the extension of the traditional dynamic time warping (DTW) matching scheme. We propose the use of a set of features derived from a Gaussian mixture model (GMM) for the alignment of the signatures using DTW. These features aid in capturing signature-dependent characteristics of a user in the feature space with a probabilistic framework. In addition, we explore the characteristics of the warping path of DTW, by employing the proposed GMM features. We derive a score for the warping path, and fuse it to that of the DTW score for verifying the authenticity of a test signature. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first of its kind that uses the features of the GMM, a model-based classifier into the framework of the DTW technique for online signature verification. The experiments are conducted on the publicly available MCYT database for both common and user thresholds. The results obtained are promising over prior works for this database.

I. INTRODUCTION
IN RECENT times, owing to security concerns, authen-tication of a person has become a necessity. Traditional means of authentication include the use of password and/or PIN number. These have a disadvantage that they can be either forgotten or stolen. Bio-metrics refers to identification of a person based on their physical or behavioral characteristics [1]. It is inherently, more reliable than traditional systems such as passwords. It is desired that a candidate biometric used in an authentication system demonstrates the properties of universality, distinctiveness, permanence, and acceptability [2].
From the works in literature, the field of bio-metrics is categorized to one of two types, namely (i) physiological and (ii) behavioral. The physiological bio-metrics employ direct measurements of a part of the human body, such as fingerprint, face, iris and hand-scan for identification. On the other hand, behavioral bio-metrics operate on features derived from data obtained from an action performed by the user. A signature is one such bio-metric that falls into this category. In a signature verification system, features of a test signature are contrasted against those from a set of enrolled genuine signatures of an user whose identity is to be authenticated. This leads to one of two possible outcomes: either the claimed signature is accepted as genuine or it is rejected as forgery.
The recent trend in technology has led to the release of devices offering a pen based interface to input handwritten data. Such devices, referred to as hand-held devices are manufactured small, portable and are easy to use. They primarily utilize an electronic pen (referred to as stylus) to capture data on a pressure-sensitive screen. The dynamic information of handwriting, such as (x, y) spatial location, pressure, azimuth and inclination are recorded in the device by sensing the movements of the pen-tip. In the literature, the processing of such data is referred to as online. This makes it different with regards to the off-line case, where-in only the completed writing in the form of a bitmap image is available for analysis using image processing techniques.
The input to any online signature verification system comprises a set of strokes, each of which in turn are a sequence of points. A stroke starts with a pen-down movement and ends with the next pen-up movement. It is presented by its duration and a sequence of x and y coordinates, along with other dynamic information.

A. Related Works
The topic of online signature verification has been a very active area for research exploration, since the past three decades, with the survey of works being well documented in [3]–[8]. There are two strategies in literature to extract the relevant information / features from the signature: global feature based and local feature based approach. In the former, a set of global features such as trajectory length, number of strokes, number of local extremals (minima and maxima in x and y position trajectories) are derived from the acquired temporal sequences for signature representation. Contrast to that, in the local based approach, a set of attributes are extracted to describe the local characteristics at each sample point of the online trace of the signature.
Considering the classifier methodologies, the works in literature can be broadly categorized to - distance based and model based approach. With regards to the distance based approach, the Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is a wellknown elastic matching algorithm, that aligns the sample points of two signatures having different time lengths [7]. Other matching techniques include the Longest Common Subsequence (LCSS) [9], [10] and the Edit Distance [11]. Yet, another view to implement the distance based approach is
1556-6013 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
to represent each signature with the fixed length global feature vector and then employ the classical distance measure such as Euclidean, City-Block for distance computation [12], [13].
The model based technique, on the other hand, builds the statistical profile of the signature with generative models like Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [14], Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) [15] or discriminative ones such as Multi-layer Perceptron (MLP) [16] and Support Vector Machines (SVM) [17]. These approaches evaluate the relation of the features of the signature to be verified with regards to their statistical characterization.
In this work, we propose an online signature verification system, in line with DTW based approach. The primary focus, as we shall see in the subsequent section, is on exploiting cues from a model based approach to improve its performance. Hence, in the remainder of this section, we outline details of recent works from both distance-based and model-based techniques in the literature of online signature verification.
The pioneering use of the DTW is the work of [18] for the application of speech recognition. The early exploration of this technique for online signature verification can be found in [19], where signatures represented by local features are aligned by dynamic programming to compute the dissimilarity between them. Feng and Wah [20] propose a variant of DTW termed as ‘extreme point warping’, where-in only selected points of the online trace are considered for alignment. A work by Gupta and Joyce [11] align a sequence of position extremal points between a query and the set of enrolled signatures, by adopting a string matching algorithm. Kholmatov and Yanikoglu [17] represent the signature with a three dimensional distance vector obtained from the DTW distances of the query with a set of reference signatures. The SVM classifier trained on these three dimensional feature vectors of both genuine and forgery signatures is used for verification. The same authors in [21] propose a verification system, based on a fusion of DTW with Fourier descriptors. A combination of Vector Quantization (VQ) approach with DTW has been proposed in [22], wherein the quantized feature vector of the test signature, of a claimed user, is matched against those of the enrolled reference signatures. The main focus for quantization of the feature vector was from the viewpoint of enhancing the privacy of the biometric system, so that hackers find it difficult to replicate the biometric data from the extracted features transmitted. In the work [23], a set of length normalization schemes based on three re-sampling techniques are considered for reducing the computational complexity of signature alignment. The authors use the concept of fractional distance for the dissimilarity computation. Recently, a Longest Common Sub-Sequence (LCSS) based matching of online signatures represented by turning angle based local features is proposed in [9].
With regards to the model based techniques, a number of verification approaches has been attempted. In the work [14], a set of eight time sequences and their first and second order derivatives are calculated from the online signature data. The features are normalized and modeled by a left to right HMM with continuous probability density functions. In the verification step, likelihood scores are considered as
relative values with respect to a reference population and are normalized by an appropriate technique [24]. A fusion of HMM likelihood values with segmentation score calculated from the Viterbi path information has been exploited cleverly to discriminate the forgeries from the genuine signatures in [25]. The segmentation score is obtained by computing the average City Block distance between the segmentation vectors, corresponding to Viterbi path of the genuine signatures with that of the test signature. In a recent work, a study of generative models, primarily the HMM based approaches has been presented in [15]. The idea of GMMs for online signature verification has been proposed by several authors [26]–[28]. Here, the log-likelihood scores obtained are compared to a threshold for authentication. A two-stage statistical system comprising a simplified GMM model for global signature features, and a discrete HMM model for local signature features is adopted by the authors in [29]. Another model based system worth mentioning is that of the ensemble of Parzen Window classifiers considered in [30]. Here, the ensembles are built using different feature subsets, selected by bootstrapping based techniques.
There have been quite a few works very recently where the idea of dividing the signature into a number of partitions is considered. The partitions are made depending on the values of attributes such as speed of signature and pen pressure. Thereafter, the partitions are used for the classification step, which is achieved using flexible neuro-fuzzy one class classifier [31]–[34].
To our knowledge, there has been limited exploration in the area of combining model-based approach with that of distancebased technique in the literature of online signature verification. In [35], a combination of HMM and DTW based system is attempted for signature verification. The two classifiers are separately modelled and their scores combined using the sum rule, after appropriate normalization. In place of the HMM, the combination is done with the score from the Parzen Window classifier in [36].
In this proposal, as a contribution, we consider the incorporation of a model-based technique (GMM) with the distance based method (DTW), from a different view, as will be discussed in the the remainder of this paper.

II. MOTIVATION AND CONTRIBUTIONS
The systems based on DTW in literature perform a temporal alignment between the feature vectors that are derived at each sample point of the online trace of the signatures being compared. The resulting scores after the accumulation of distance values along the warping path are used to verify the authenticity of the signature. The DTW score reflect in a way the similarity of the test signature with the reference genuine signature of an user, enrolled to the system. One aspect that has hardly been sought after in the literature is on considering the sequence of feature vectors, being matched, from a probabilistic viewpoint. This representation can help capture the user dependent characteristics of a signature, thereby improving the discrimination between the genuine and skilled forgery signatures. The main premise comes from the notion that feature vectors corresponding to parts of the online
trace of the genuine signatures of an user reside in specific regions of the feature space. Thus, it would be interesting, to explore out on a probabilistic representation for the feature vector corresponding to each sample point of the online trace, with regards to their degree of association to each of these regions.
As a step in this direction, we consider in this proposal, to encode the local features extracted at each sample of the online trace of a user’s signature by a set of descriptors, that are obtained from a GMM (Gaussian Mixture Model). The resulting descriptors from the GMM obtained at each sample point of the signatures being compared are temporally aligned using the DTW algorithm and matched.
It is worth mentioning here that the present work is the first of its kind that takes into consideration the features derived from the model based approach into the computation of the distance based technique of DTW for signature verification. This makes our proposal different from the other works on combining model-based with distance-based techniques [35], [36]- wherein, the emphasis has been to separately consider the outputs of each of them, followed by a fusion using a sum rule.
Another contribution that we seek to explore in this paper is on exploiting information from the warping path of the DTW cost matrix for verification. The warping path is obtained by placing constraints on the alignments between pair of sample points of the signatures being compared. At times, the sole dependence of the DTW score may not be effective enough in discriminating the skilled forgery signatures from the genuineespecially, when they are quite close to each other. The verification decision (based on the threshold) may thus lead to an incorrect authentication of the signature being verified. In order to alleviate this issue, we propose, in this work, a scoring that encapsulates the characteristics of the warping path in the cost matrix. The score is obtained by considering a match between two histograms that are generated from the cost matrix - the details of which are discussed in sub-section VI-B.
The scoring of the warping path, to our knowledge, is a new direction of exploration - the striking highlight of which is in the use of the GMM based descriptors itself to derive the histogram, and there-of, the warping path score. Finally, owing
to the complementary nature of the warping path score, to that of DTW score, we explore a fusion of the two scores using the sum rule combiner. The combined score is then used to authenticate the veracity of the test signature. We show that the fusion of scores improves the verification performance, beyond that provided by the DTW score alone. It is also worth noting that both the scores are generated from analyzing the DTW cost matrix.
Based on the preceding discussions, the following may be regarded as the main points of the paper.
1) Consideration of the point based feature vectors of the online trace of signatures, from a probabilistic view, by encoding them using GMM based descriptors, prior to DTW matching (discussed in subsection VI-A). 2) Exploring the utility of the descriptors from the GMM for scoring the characteristics of the warping path (discussed in subsection VI-B). 3) Fusion of the warping path score with that of DTW for performance enhancement of the online signature verification system (discussed in subsection VI-C).
Extensive experiments of the proposal has been conducted on the publicly available MCYT database for both common and user thresholds. The results obtained are promising over prior works for this database.

III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Figure 1 presents the block schematic of our proposal. The signature to be verified is passed through a feature extractor module, that operates on each local point of the online trace to derive a set of attributes. The resulting feature vectors are encoded probabilistically using the parameters of the GMM, that has been learnt from a set of enrolled signatures of an user. The resulting encoded feature descriptors are then aligned, using DTW, against those of the enrolled signatures, that are also encoded using a GMM. Subsequent to the generation of the warping path, we analyze its trend to help discriminate the genuine signatures from the skilled forgery much better. Here again, we use the GMM based features for scoring the warping path. Thereafter, for verification of the signature, we consider a fusion of the warping path score, to that of DTW score.
In the subsequent subsections, we present details of each of these blocks. We begin by first describing the features derived from the raw trace of the signatures in section IV. This is followed by providing a background of the GMM classifier and DTW matching algorithm in section V. The detailed description of our proposal is described in subsections VI-A, VI-B and VI-C.

IV. FEATURE EXTRACTION
The basic features of the online trace of the input signature, as captured from the device, include (x, y) spatial co-ordinates, pressure p, azimuth φ and inclination angle θ . Prior to feature extraction, each of the basic features are normalized separately, using the min-max transformation, to the range [0, 1]. This step ensures that the numeric scale of the features across all signatures are same.
The feature extractor module extracts a set of eleven features from the normalized basic features. These are enumerated below:

A. First Order Difference of Basic Features
defined, for t = 1, 2, ..., n − 1 as: x(t) = x(t + 1)− x(t) y(t) = y(t + 1)− y(t) p(t) = p(t + 1)− p(t) φ(t) = φ(t + 1)− φ(t) θ(t) = θ(t + 1)− θ(t) (1)
The notation n corresponds to the number of sample points in the online signature.

B. Second Order Difference of Spatial Coordinates
defined for t = 1, 2, ..., n − 2, as: 2x(t) = x(t + 1)− x(t) 2 y(t) = y(t + 1)− y(t) (2)

C. Sine and Cosine Measures
of the angle computed with respect to horizontal axis, defined for t = 1, 2, ..., n − 1, as
sin(α(t)) = y(t)√ ( x(t))2 + ( y(t))2
cos(α(t)) = x(t)√ ( x(t))2 + ( y(t))2 (3)
D. Length-Based Features
defined by
l(t) = √ ( x(t))2 + ( y(t))2 l(t) = √ ( 2x(t))2 + ( 2 y(t))2 (4)
The feature l(t) relates to the change in length obtained between successive pen positions.
We assume that we have N genuine (reference) signatures of an user, that are enrolled into the verification system.
Accordingly, we denote them by {S1, S2, ..., SN }. The point based feature vector sequence for the pth enrolled signature Sp is given by:
Fp = {f1p, f2p, ..., fn p−2p } 1 ≤ p ≤ N (5) Here n p corresponds to the number of sample points in Sp . Each of the feature vectors in Fp can be written as f j p = [ f jp (1) f jp (2) .... f jp (m) ...... f jp (11)]T, where the notation f jp (m) corresponds to the mth feature extracted at the j th sample point of the online trace of the reference signature Sp . The symbol T corresponds to the transpose operation of the row vector.

V. BACKGROUND MATERIAL
In this subsection, we present the overview of Gaussian Mixture Models and Dynamic Time Warping, with the aim of introducing the relevant definitions (with notations) that will be used in discussing our proposal in subsection VI-A, VI-B and VI-C.

A. Gaussian Mixture Models
A Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM) captures the underlying statistical variabilities of the point based features, being used for describing the online trace of the signatures. Mathematically, for a d-dimensional feature vector x, the GMM comprising M Gaussian components is given by:
p(x) = M∑
k=1 wkN (x | μk, k) (6)
where {wk}Mk=1 represent the weights or the contributions of each Gaussian and sum up to unity. Each of the M Gaussian components are parameterized by a d × 1 mean vector μk and a d × d co-variance matrix k
N (x|μk, k) = 1 (2π) d 2 | k| 12 e− 1 2 (x−μk)T k−1(x−μk) (7)
The parameters of GMM are learnt from the set of enrolled signatures of an user by using the Expectation Maximization (EM) algorithm. In this work, we consider the covariance matrix to be diagonal. In addition, we also avoid an over-fit of the variance parameters during the EM algorithm estimation by flooring the variance parameters in the covariance matrix to a minimum value [37].

B. DTW Based Matching
The DTW is an elastic matching algorithm that is used to compare pairs of signatures, that are to be matched. We consider a test signature T having a feature vector sequence of length nT − 2 and a reference signature Sp of length n p − 2 points respectively. We begin by constructing a cost matrix C of size (nT − 2) × (n p − 2). The (r, s)th element (referred to as a ‘cell’) in C corresponds to the dissimilarity value d(r, s) between the r th point of T with the sth point of Sp . The measure of dissimilarity used, in this work, for generating the cost matrix is the City Block distance.
By utilizing the elements in matrix C , we perform the following recursion to compute the DTW distance between T and Sp .
ψ(r, s) = d(r, s)+ min
⎧ ⎪⎨
⎪⎩ ψ(r, s − 1) ψ(r − 1, s − 1) ψ(r − 1, s)
(8)
Here ψ(r, s) is the cumulative distance up to the current element. The DTW distance corresponds to the value of the cell ψ(nT −2, n p−2). Apart from obtaining the DTW distance, we can also back trace the sequence of cells in C , whose corresponding dissimilarity values contributed to making up the DTW score. The sequence of cells comprise a ‘warping path’ denoted by W∗p . This path defines a mapping between T and Sp , and satisfies the constraints of boundary conditions, continuity and monotonicity. In this work, the set of cells in the warping path W∗p are denoted as:
W∗p = {(a1, b1), (a2, b2), ..., (alW∗p , blW∗p )} = {(ai , bi )} lW∗p i=1
(9)
Here, lW∗p represents the number of aligned pairs along the warping path W∗p , and is referred to as the ‘length of warping path’ in this work. The notation (ai , bi ) 1 indicates that the feature vector corresponding to athi sample point of T is aligned to that of bthi sample point of Sp . Owing to the boundary conditions, we have (a1, b1) = (1, 1) and (alW∗p , blW∗p ) = (nT − 2, n p − 2). The continuity and monotonicity conditions necessitate that ai−1 ≤ ai ≤ ai−1 + 1, bi−1 ≤ bi ≤ bi−1 + 1, 1 ≤ ai ≤ nT − 2 and 1 ≤ bi ≤ n p − 2. The warping path W∗p , at times, can give rise to one to many or many to one alignments. Thus, the indices in the sets {ai } lW∗p i=1 and {bi} lW∗p i=1 may not be necessarily unique. The varying length of enrolled signatures, during the matching process, is accounted for by normalizing the DTW distance ψ(nT − 2, n p − 2) with the length lW∗p of W∗p [18].
d p1 = ψ(nT − 2, n p − 2)
lW∗p =
∑lW∗p i=1 d(ai , bi )
lW∗p (10)
In this work, we denote d p1 as the DTW score, obtained when the signature T is matched against the pth enrolled signature, Sp . For a genuine to genuine signature match, the value of d p1 is low. The contrary is true when a forgery is matched to a genuine signature.

VI. DETAILS OF THE NEW PROPOSAL
In this section, we present the details of the novel signature verification, that makes use of the GMM features in a DTW framework. For sake of clarity, we divide this section into three parts and present the algorithm in sequence.
1From an implementation view, (ai , bi ) corresponds to the cell in the a th i
row and bthi column in the cost matrix C .

A. GMM Based Feature Representation
The main idea, as mentioned in Section II, is to encode the feature vector sequence derived at each sample point of the online trace probabilistically. The solution to this is straightforward, thanks to the GMM that has been trained a-priori using the enrolled training signatures of an user. Each user is modelled by a specific GMM of M Gaussian components, with parameters {wk, k,μk}Mk=1. The membership of the feature f jp (corresponding to the j th sample point of signature Sp of an user), to the kth Gaussian component is a scalar value denoted by g jp(k) and is given by:
g jp(k) = wkN (f j p | μk, k)
∑M c=1 wcN (f jp | μc, c)
(11)
The membership value g jp(k) is a probability measure, bounded between 0 and 1. Likewise, using the above equation, we can evaluate the membership values of the feature f jp to each of the M Gaussian components. This results in a set of M probabilities, which can then be stacked into a M dimensional feature vector, of the form:
g jp = [g jp(1) g jp(2) .... g jp(M)]T (12) Any feature vector can thus be represented probabilistically in terms of membership values to different Gaussian components. We hereinafter refer to g jp as the membership feature vector corresponding to the point based feature vector f jp , derived from the temporal trace of the signature. For authentication, we encode each of the feature vectors of the signatures to be compared by their membership vectors, and then align them using the DTW algorithm, described in section V-B. The resulting matching score is then compared to a threshold for decision-making.
Owing to the fact that each of the values in the membership feature vector being matched is a number between 0 and 1, it can be inferred from Equation 10, the value of d p1 will be bounded between 0 and 2 (with City Block distance as a dissimilarity measure in the cost matrix C).
To demonstrate the utility of the proposed GMM based membership feature vectors for signature verification, we present in Figures 2(b) and (c), sample of a genuine and skilled forgery test signature, that is matched separately against the enrolled reference signature of an user in Figure 2(a). The signatures being depicted are from a user of the MCYT100 database, that will be used for experimentation in this work. For sake of illustration, we assume that there is only one signature of an user enrolled to the system. When the signatures are matched using the set of local features presented in Section IV, the DTW matching scores of the genuine and skilled forgery signature with the enrolled signature are found to be 0.55 and 0.52 respectively. We observe that the DTW score of genuine signature is higher than that of the skilled forgery signature, and hence, the verification based on a threshold will result in a wrong decision. For this illustration, if we choose the threshold value τ > 0.55, the skilled forgery signature of Figure 2(c) will get falsely accepted. A threshold value of τ < 0.52 will result in false rejection of genuine
TABLE I ILLUSTRATION OF THE DTW SCORES OBTAINED USING THE PROPOSED MEMBERSHIP FEATURE VECTORS, AS COMPARED TO THE FEATURE VECTORS OUTLINED IN SUBSECTION IV. THE SIGNATURES MENTIONED IN THE FIRST COLUMN REFER TO FIGURE 2. A GMM COMPRISING M = 32 GAUSSIAN COMPONENTS IS USED FOR THE EXTRACTION OF MEMBER-SHIP FEATURE VECTORS
Fig. 3. Illustration of the histograms of distance values falling on the warping path, resulting from a DTW match of a genuine and skilled forgery signature of Figure 2 (b)-(c) with the enrolled signature of Figure 2 (a). The sub-figures (a) and (b) represent histograms constructed using the set of features suggested in sub-section IV, while those in sub-figures (c) and (d) correspond to the GMM based descriptors - the membership feature vectors. For this illustration, we derive the membership feature vectors from a GMM comprising 32 Gaussian components.
signature of Figure 2(b), while a value between 0.52 and 0.55 will wrongly authenticate both the signatures.
The above erroneous decision is alleviated with the use of GMM based membership feature description for signature representation. When DTW is performed on the signatures, the d1 scores of the genuine and forgery signature with the enrolled signature turns out to be 0.81 and 1.05 respectively. Considering that the genuine signature match has a DTW score lower than that of the skilled forgery signature, the decision making process will result in the correct verification of the signatures. For this illustration, we derive the membership feature vectors from a GMM comprising 32 Gaussian components.
For better clarity, the preceding discussion with regards to the DTW scores obtained using the proposed membership feature vector is summarized in Table I.
To further corroborate on our analysis, we present the histograms of the distance values accumulated along the length of the warping path for the genuine and skilled forgery signature match in Figures 3 (a)-(d). The bins in the first two sub-figures (namely (a) and (b)) are based on the distances obtained by matching the signature in Figures 2 (b) and (c)
with Figure 2 (a) using the set of features described in subsection IV. Clearly, we see that many of the bin indices have similar values with the computed City-Block distance between these histograms being 0.18. Contrast to that, if the signatures are matched using the GMM based membership feature vectors, we get the histograms shown in Figure 3 (c)-(d), that are more discriminating with a City Block distance of 0.37 between them. The high dissimilarity value obtained justifies empirically, our notion of considering the GMM based membership feature vectors in the DTW framework for enhancing the discrimination between the genuine and skilled forgery signatures.

B. Warping Path Based Feature Extraction
We now outline our strategy that utilizes the characteristics of the warping path in the DTW cost matrix for the verification of online signatures. The idea is to consider the DTW alignments (ai , bi ), together with another alignment (ai , ri ) - the computation of which is described in the following paragraph. The characteristics of each of the alignments are captured with the aid of separate histograms, whose corresponding
bin indices are voted, based on the GMM based membership vectors. Thereafter, the two obtained histograms are matched, and the resulting score obtained is fused with that of the DTW score. This score combination is shown to improve the discrimination between the genuine and skilled forgery signatures.
For the textual presentation in this subsection, we consider that the test signature T is temporally aligned with the pth enrolled signature Sp , using the DTW algorithm discussed in sub-section V-B. Also the cells (ai , bi ) lW∗p i=1 of the warping path (denoted by W∗p) are presumed to be known to us. Corresponding to each alignment (ai , bi ), along the warping path W∗p , we consider another alignment (ai , ri ). The mathematical formulation for obtaining the index ri of the sample point in the reference signature Sp is as follows:
ri = arg min 1≤s≤n p−2 |gaiT − gsp| 1 ≤ i ≤ lW∗p (13)
Here gaiT corresponds to the GMM based membership feature vector for the athi sample point in test signature T . The above equation suggests us to search along the athi row of the cost matrix C and then assign the index of the sample point, whose GMM based membership feature vector provides the closest City Block distance match to gaiT . Accordingly, we can rewrite Equation 13 as:
ri = arg min 1≤s≤n p−2 d(ai , s) 1 ≤ i ≤ lW∗p (14)
The above computation can be performed ∀ai in the warping path W∗p , thus leading to another set of alignments of the form2:
∗p = {(a1, r1), (a2, r2), ..., (alW∗p , rlW∗p )} (15)
Note that the pair (ai , ri ) refers to the cell in the athi row and r thi column in cost matrix C . From the definitions of the alignments (ai , bi ) and (ai , ri ) , we can make the following inferences:
1) Both bi and ri correspond to an index in the enrolled reference signature Sp . 2) The warping path of DTW always passes through the alignment (ai , bi ) ∀i , 1 ≤ i ≤ lW∗p in the cost matrix. As mentioned in Section V-B, (ai , bi ) represent the indices of the warping path, obtained from back tracing the sequence of cells in the cost matrix, whose corresponding dissimilarity values contributed to making up the DTW score. 3) However, it is not mandatory for the warping path of DTW to always pass through the alignment (ai , ri ) ∀i , 1 ≤ i ≤ lW∗p . This is owing to the fact that ri is obtained via a nearest match, along the athi row of the cost matrix C , as described in Equation 14. 4) It is important to mention that (ai , ri ) is not related to the warping path, as such. Accordingly, the continuity and
2To handle the infrequent case, where more than one match can give rise to multiple values of ri , we consider the value corresponding to the minimum d(ai , ri ).
monotonicity condition as required in a DTW framework do not apply. Given the set of alignments in W∗p and ∗p , we construct histograms, denoted as HW∗p and H ∗p respectively. Each of the histograms comprise M bins, corresponding to the number of Gaussian components in the GMM. Initially, the votes in each of the indices are set to zero. Corresponding to each bi , such that (ai , bi ) ∈ W∗p, the indices in the histogram HW∗p are voted in accordance to the GMM membership feature vectors gbip . In other words, the kth bin of HW∗p is accumulated with a vote of magnitude gbip (k), namely, the kth feature value in the membership vector gbip . For a given M dimensional membership vector, the above accumulation of votes is performed across all the M indices in HW∗p . Likewise, the process is continued for all values of sample points bi in Sp , ∀i ∈ {1, 2, ...., lW∗p}. The resulting votes of the histogram indices are then normalized with the length of the warping path lW∗p , to ensure that they are in the numeric range [0, 1].
A similar voting procedure is performed to generate the histogram H ∗p . However here, the accumulation of votes is done using the membership vectors grip in Sp , ∀i ∈ {1, 2, ...., lW∗p}.3 As in the case of HW∗p , normalization of votes in H ∗p is performed using lW∗p . For better clarity, the generation of the histograms is summarized in Algorithm 1.
We now present on how the characteristics of the histograms HW∗p and H ∗p can be exploited to propose a novel score, that can aid in verifying online signatures. To begin with, consider the matching of a genuine test signature T against a reference genuine signature Sp in the enrolled set. Owing to the high degree of similarity between parts of the trace, one should expect, the feature vectors gbip and g ri p , to be close to each other for most values of i , 1 ≤ i ≤ lW∗p . The limiting scenario occurs when a genuine test signature T is perfectly matched against Sp , wherein, the cost matrix obtained is a square matrix, whose diagonal elements are zero, with non-negative values in the off-diagonal entries. In this case, the DTW score is zero and gbip = grip , ∀i , 1 ≤ i ≤ lW∗p . Accordingly, the histograms HW∗p and H ∗p are perfectly matched with a dissimilarity value of zero. Coming now, for the non-ideal case of a genuine match with a reference signature, we expect to see the histograms HW∗p and H ∗p exhibit a high degree of similarity.
The contrary is true when a skilled forgery test signature is compared against an enrolled genuine signature. In this case, each of the feature vectors gbip and g ri p are not that likely to be close, as compared to a genuine-to-reference signature match. Hence, one can expect the normalized values of the bins of the histograms HW∗p and H ∗p to exhibit a lesser degree of similarity. As such, one can consider measuring the degree of dissimilarity between the histograms under consideration and to use the same as the score to characterize the warping path. We denote the warping path score, obtained from a match of a test signature with the pth enrolled signature, Sp of an user by d p2 .
3It is worth reminding that both bi and ri correspond to an index in the enrolled reference signature Sp .
Algorithm 1 Histogram Generation : HW∗p and H ∗p 1) Perform the DTW match of the test signature T with the pth enrolled signature, Sp of an user. The membership feature
vectors corresponding to T and Sp , (as derived from a pre-trained GMM of M Gaussian components) is used for the alignment of the online traces.
2) Extract the cells (ai , bi ) in the warping path W∗p from the DTW cost matrix by back-tracing. 3) Corresponding to each cell (ai , bi ) ∈ W∗p , compute the alignment (ai , ri ) using Equation 14 4) Initialize two histograms, HW∗p and H ∗p , with zero votes for each of the M bins.
5) For every (ai , bi ) ∈ W∗p and (ai , ri ) ∈ ∗p , ∀i ∈ {1, 2, ...., lW∗p } For every k = 1 : M Accumulate the kth bin of HW∗p with the vote of magnitude g bi p (k)
Accumulate the kth bin of H ∗p with the vote of magnitude grip (k) End End
6) Normalize the votes of the indices of HW∗p and H ∗p , with the length of the warping path lW∗p .
Let {hW∗p(k)}Mk=1 and {h ∗p(k)}Mk=1 correspond to the votes in the M bins of the histograms HW∗p and H ∗p respectively. The proposed warping feature d p2 is the City Block distance between these histograms, defined as:
d p2 = M∑
k=1 |hW∗p(k)− h ∗p (k)| (16)
It may also be inferred from the expression above, that the value of d p2 would be bounded between 0 and 2 - this being the case, since the votes of the histogram bins has been normalized with the length of the warping path lW∗p during its generation (refer Algorithm 1).
To demonstrate the usefulness of the warping path score for signature verification, we present a DTW matching of a genuine and skilled forgery signature in Figures 4(b) and (c)
with the genuine reference signature of Figure 4(a). The DTW is performed on the membership feature vectors, derived from the GMM, as discussed in sub-section VI-A. Figures 4 (d) and (e) depict the histograms HW∗ and H ∗ , corresponding to a genuine-signature match. The same histograms, as obtained from the skilled forgery signature match, is shown in Figures 4 (f) and (g). Clearly, the City Block distance between the histograms of Figures 4 (d) and (e) are lower compared to those between the Figures 4 (f) and (g) - their values being 0.49 and 0.98 respectively.

C. Fusion
We now propose the conjunction of the warping path score with that of DTW, to improve the performance of the verification system, beyond that provided with the DTW score alone. Given N enrolled signatures of a user, we come up
with N scores of d1 and d2 denoted by {d11 , d21 , ..., d N1 } and{d12 , d22 , ..., d N2 } respectively. We now consider the average of these scores as:
dmean1 = 1
N
N∑ p=1 d p1 d mean 2 = 1 N N∑ p=1 d p2 (17)
A two dimensional plot of the values of dmean1 and d mean 2 for the genuine and skilled forgery test signatures of a user from the MCYT-100 database is presented in Figure 5. The experimental protocol discussed in sub-section VII-A is employed for generating these plots, with the values of dmean1 and d mean 2 recorded over a set of ten enrolment trials. We see that the exclusive use of either of the scores present a noticeable overlap between the genuine and skilled forgery signatures. Nevertheless, we can consider exploring out on utilizing the contributions of both the scores for authentication, through a combination scheme. In such cases, we say the scores are complementary. 4 The main idea behind the score combination is to reduce the extent of overlap between the genuine and skilled forgery signatures, thus improving the verification system. A simple choice that we employ in this work is the sum rule:
dT = dmean1 + dmean2 (18) The verification system accepts the signature sample T if dT is less than a threshold τ . Otherwise, it rejects it as a forgery.
In addition to the above, we experimented on other strategies of using the sum rule for fusion (namely by considering the minimum and maximum of the combined scores), as given below:
dT = min 1≤p≤N d p 1 + d p2 dT = max 1≤p≤N d p 1 + d p2 (19)
The performance evaluation of each of these fusion methods is presented in subsection VII-B.
4It may be mentioned in passing that when the distribution of dmean2 scores between the genuine and skilled forgery signatures do not overlap, the use of dmean2 alone would suffice for verification. In such cases, information of dmean1 does not complement to that of d mean 2 .
We conclude our discussion, by a mention on the computation complexity of our proposal in Table II. We present this with regards to each step for a test signature T of an user, whose N samples are enrolled in the system.

VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Experimental Set-Up
The efficacy of the proposal is demonstrated on the publicly available MCYT-100 database [38]. This database comprises signature samples of 100 individuals - with a set of 25 genuine and 25 forgery signatures being collected for each individual. The skilled forgeries were contributed by five different users, who had access to the static images of the genuine signature. The trace of the signatures being captured from the WACOM pen tablet comprises the (x, y) spatial co-ordinates, pressure, azimuth angle and inclination angle.
For most experiments in this paper, we randomly select a set of five genuine signature of an user for enrollment. The remaining 20 genuine signatures and 25 skilled forgeries are used for testing the efficacy of our proposal. This process of random selection of enrollment signatures and performance evaluation is repeated over ten repetitions.
In this work, we provide EER values for both user and common threshold settings. In the former, we use only the matching scores corresponding to the test signatures of the claimed user in question to compute the error. Thereafter, the EERs obtained across all the users enrolled in the system are averaged for performance evaluation. Contrary to the above, in the common threshold set-up, the matching scores corresponding to the signatures being tested from all the users are pooled together to compute the EER. However, a normalization of scores is done to ensure that their values are in a comparable range across the enrolled users. Accordingly, corresponding to an user, we consider subtracting the matched score of a test signature from that of the mean obtained from the set of his / her enrolled signatures. Assuming N enrolled signatures, we compute the mean from the set of
(N 2 ) scores.
Thereafter, the mean subtracted score is mapped to a similarity value in the range [0, 1] by a sigmoidal function and used for computing the EER.
The EERs obtained (for both common and user thresholds) over the ten repetitions of the experiment are averaged, to evaluate the verification system.

B. Performance Evaluation
Prior to outlining the results of the experiments, demonstrating our proposal, we provide details of the systems being implemented, together with their abbreviations, for the discussions in this section 5
• BL-DTW : A DTW system, wherein the alignment of signatures being compared is based on the point based feature set discussed in subsection IV. This system provides an EER of 3.65 % and 6.29 % for user threshold and common threshold respectively. • GMM-DTW : A DTW system, wherein the alignment of signatures being compared is based on the proposed GMM-based membership feature vectors discussed in subsection VI-A. • FUS: A system wherein the proposed warping path feature (discussed in subsection VI-B) is fused to that of the DTW score of the GMM-DTW system.
As a first exploration, we outline in Table III, the performance of the proposed GMM-DTW and FUS systems for the number of Gaussian components M in the GMM, varying from 2 to 128. The results of the BL-DTW are also noted for comparison. For this experiment, we choose the values of M in powers of 2. It can be observed from the third and seventh columns, that the GMM-DTW system provides reduced EER results over the BL-DTW for number of Gaussian components M= 8, 16, 32 and 64 in the GMM. The lowest EER of 4% is obtained using 32 Gaussian components - this corresponds to a performance improvement of 36.41 % over the BL-DTW of 6.29%, using common threshold. Also, an reduction of EER by 56.16 % can be inferred for the user threshold case - with the EER reducing from 3.65 % (BL-DTW ) to 1.6 % (GMM-DTW ). The improved performance can be attributed to the fact that the signature representation using the GMM based membership feature vectors encapsulates the statistical characteristics of the parts of the trace, apart from the temporal information, that is taken into consideration by the DTW. However, with fewer number of Gaussian components M in the GMM, the finer nuances useful for the discrimination of genuine and forgery signature are not adequately captured. This is primarily, due to the problem of under-fitting, wherein the number of model parameters
5It may be noted that both GMM-DTW and FUS systems are the proposals of this work.
learnt by the GMM are not sufficient to characterise all the variabilities in the feature vectors, specific to an user. This trend is evident for the case of M=2 and 4. With the increase in number of Gaussian components, this problem is alleviated with the GMM based membership feature vector providing an increased discrimination between genuine and forgery signature in the GMM-DTW system. However, with very large values of M , the problem of over-fitting begins to reduce the verification capability, due to the lack in the number of the feature vectors for modeling the large number of the GMM parameters. Hence, for M=128, we see an increase in EER to 8.25% for the case of common threshold - this value being higher than the EER of 6.29 % of the BL-DTW system.
Coming, now to the FUS system, we again see further reductions in EER for Gaussian components greater than 8 in the GMM. The sum rule, described by the Equation 18 is used for implementing this system. We obtain the lowest EER of 3.05 % at M = 64 for the common threshold setting. When compared to the baseline BL-DTW system of EER 6.29%, the efficacy of the FUS system is commendable, with an improvement of 51.51 %. Another noteworthy point here is with regards to the performance of the FUS system at high number of Gaussian components. We see an improvement over the BL-DTW, even at M = 128 - with EERs of 3.83 % and 1.18% for common and user threshold setting respectively. Considering that between 32 and 64 Gaussian components, there is a negligible improvement in the performance of the FUS system, for the following two experiments described, we choose a GMM comprising 32 Gaussian components for the evaluation of the proposal.
Apart from using the mean of distance scores dmean1 and dmean2 between reference and test signature for the sum rule based fusion (Equation 18), we experimented on the combination schemes presented in Equation 19. Table IV outlines the results of the BL-DTW, GMM-DTW and FUS systems on these strategies. The sum rule based on mean of distance values outperforms the other, with the EER of 3.27% for the FUS system with common threshold setting. The minimum and maximum based strategies of sum rule, on the other hand, achieves EERs of 4.59% and 6.06% respectively. The mean-based technique in a way, achieves better performance by smoothing out the intra-user variations by averaging the scores d1 and d2 over the set of reference signatures, prior to combining them. This explains its improvement in verification
over the other two strategies. Nevertheless, we see that our proposed GMM-DTW and FUS systems outperform the BLDTW system across all the three strategies.
We next consider evaluating the performance of proposed system with varying number of reference signature samples. From Table V, we infer a reduction in EER with increase in the number of reference signatures. In particular, the FUS system achieves an error rate to as low as 1.69 % and 0.64 %, with 20 enrolled samples, for common and user thresholds respectively. However, this reduction comes with a trade-off of comparisons against more number of enrolled signatures in the DTW process.
Figure 6 provides the the Detection Error Trade-off (DET) curve - a two dimensional plot of False Acceptance Rate (FAR) against the False Rejection Rate (FRR) for varying values of decision threshold. Clearly, the FUS system (in blue) outperforms the BL-DTW (in red) and GMM-DTW (in black) over all the points on the curve. A GMM comprising M = 32 Gaussian components is used for the extraction of the membership feature vectors.
It may be noted that the baseline DTW (BL-DTW ) system considered in the preceding discussions was implemented using the point-based features in subsection IV. Thereafter, improvements in EER based on our proposal were cited with regards to this system. We believe that the proposed GMM based membership feature vectors in the DTW alignment for verification is quite generic. The reasoning to the same is that the underlying statistical variability of the different features is used for the alignment between signatures in the proposed GMM-DTW, rather than the feature value itself.
As a empirical validation to our claim, we experiment the different systems - the BL-DTW, GMM-DTW, FUS on subsets of features from subsection IV. In total, six subsets of features were chosen. For notational convenience, we provide in Table VI, abbreviations for these sets, together with their definitions. It may be noted that the eleven dimensional feature vector used for the preceding experiments corresponds to the set D6. We wish to state that the choice of feature subsets in Table VI is not based on any selection algorithm - not to mention that the main goal here is to only validate the effectiveness of the proposal to multiple feature sets. As before, we experiment using five enrolled signatures per user, using both common and user threshold settings.
Table VII summarizes the results on the different feature sets. The optimal number of Gaussian components M in the GMM, corresponding to the best EER obtained is
also provided. Based on the entries in the table, one can clearly infer an improvement in the verification performance by adopting the proposed GMM-DTW and FUS systems, in place of the BL-DTW.

C. Comparison to Prior Works
In this subsection, we present a comparison of the proposed technique with prior algorithms available in the literature of online signature verification for the same database: MCYT-100. The relevant works are enumerated in Table VIII. It is to be kept in mind that each of the systems have been trained and tested differently, with different sets of features employed for the classifiers, and hence a direct one-to-one comparison is not possible. Nevertheless, the values being reported are the best EERs from employing five genuine reference signature of an user for enrollment. The use of five genuine reference signatures has more or less become a standard protocol for performance evaluation in works on online signature verification [47]. Based on the entries in Table VIII, we see that our method provides a commendable performance - its EER of 3.05 % for the common threshold setting, being lower than the state of art works.
There are also a few recent works in which ten reference signatures are used for the experimentation, particularly in [15], [45], [46]. We see that for this set-up as well, our algorithm does give a better performance with an EER of 2.12%.

VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this research, we presented a novel utility of GMM- a model based approach into the DTW framework for signature verification. Our contributions are: (i) Proposal of GMM based feature extraction scheme, that captures the writer dependent statistical characteristics for signature matching. (ii) Derivation of a novel warping path based feature to analyze the characteristics of warping path, that can be useful for verification. (ii) Fusion of the proposed warping path based feature with normalized DTW score for enhancing the verification performance of DTW based system. The method has been demonstrated successfully on the signature data from the publicly available MCYT data base.
We now present aspects of the work, that can be explored in future. In this research, we experimented on the traditional DTW algorithm - nevertheless variants of DTW do exist
in literature [18]. It would be an interesting exploration to see how our proposal evaluates in such schemes. Moreover, ideas from this current proposal can be attempted for the application of verifying off-line signatures, though this may require extraction of features, that are suitable for matching the signature images. Notwithstanding these possible extensions, this work is the first of its kind that uses the features derived from a GMM in a DTW matching algorithm for improved verification of online signatures.

References
[1]A. Jain,A. Ross,S. PrabhakarAn introduction to biometric recognitionIEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 4–20, Jan. 2004.2004
[2]B. Zhang,W. Li,P. Qing,D. ZhangPalm-print classification by global featuresIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 370–378, Mar. 2013.2013
[3]V.S. NalwaAutomatic on-line signature verificationProc. IEEE, vol. 85, no. 2, pp. 215–239, Feb. 1997.1997
[4]R. Plamondon,G. LoretteAutomatic signature verification and writer identification—The state of the artPattern Recognit., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 107–131, 1989.1989
[5]F. Leclerc,R. PlamondonAutomatic signature verification: The state of the art—1989–1993Int. J. Pattern Recognit. Artif. Intell., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 643–660, 1994.1994
[6]R. Plamondon,M. ParizeauSignature verification from position, velocity and acceleration signals: A comparative studyProc. 9th Int. Conf. Pattern Recognit., vol. 1. Nov. 1988, pp. 260–265.1988
[7]S. Garcia-SalicettiOn-line handwritten signature verificationGuide to Biometric Reference Systems and Performance Evaluation, B. D. Petrovska-Delacrtaz and G. Chollet, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2009, pp. 125–165.2009
[8]D. ImpedovoAutomatic signature verification: The state of the artIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 609–635, Sep. 2008.2008
[9]K. Barkoula,G. Economou,S. FotopoulosOnline signature verification based on signatures turning angle representation using longest common subsequence matchingInt. J. Document Anal. Recognit. (IJDAR), vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 261–272, 2013.2013
[10]C. Gruber,T. Gruber,S. Krinninger,B. SickOnline signature verification with support vector machines based on LCSS kernel functionsIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1088–1100, Aug. 2010.2010
[11]G. Gupta,R. JoyceUsing position extrema points to capture shape in on-line handwritten signature verificationPattern Recognit., vol. 40, no. 10, pp. 2811–2817, 2007.2007
[12]D.S. Guru,H.N. PrakashOnline signature verification and recognition: An approach based on symbolic representationIEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1059–1073, Jun. 2009.2009
[13]N. Sae-Bae,N. MemonOnline signature verification on mobile devicesIEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 933–947, Jun. 2014.2014
[14]J. Fierrez,J. Ortega-Garcia,D. Ramos,J. Gonzalez-RodriguezHMM-based on-line signature verification: Feature extraction and signature modelingPattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 28, no. 16, pp. 2325–2334, 2007.2007
[15]E.A. Rua,J.A. CastroOnline signature verification based on generative modelsIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1231–1242, Aug. 2012.2012
[16]D.Z. Lejtman,S.E. GeorgeOn-line handwritten signature verification using wavelets and back-propagation neural networksProc. 6th Int. Conf. Document Anal. Recognit., Washington, DC, USA, 2001, pp. 992–996.2001
[17]A. Kholmatov,B. YanikogluIdentity authentication using improved online signature verification methodPattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 26, no. 15, pp. 2400–2408, 2005.2005
[18]L. Rabiner,B.-H. JuangFundamentals of Speech RecognitionUpper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall,1993
[19]A.K. Jain,F.D. Griess,S.D. ConnellOn-line signature verificationPattern Recognit., vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 2963–2972, 2002.2002
[20]H. Feng,C.C. WahOnline signature verification using a new extreme points warping techniquePattern Recognit. Lett., vol. 24, no. 16, pp. 2943–2951, 2003.2003
[21]B. Yanikoglu,A. KholmatovOnline signature verification using Fourier descriptorsEURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process, vol. 2009, p. 12, Jan. 2009.2009
[22]M. Faundez-ZanuyOn-line signature recognition based on VQ-DTWPattern Recognit., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 981–992, Mar. 2007.2007
[23]C. Vivaracho-Pascual,M. Faundez-Zanuy,J.M. PascualAn efficient low cost approach for on-line signature recognition based on length normalization and fractional distancesPattern Recognit., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 183–193, 2009.2009
[24]J. Fierrez-Aguilar,J. Ortega-Garcia,J. Gonzalez-RodriguezTarget dependent score normalization techniques and their application to signature verificationIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 418–425, Aug. 2005.2005
[25]B.L. Van,S. Garcia-Salicetti,B. DorizziOn using the Viterbi path along with HMM likelihood information for online signature verificationIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 1237–1247, Oct. 2007.2007
[26]J. Richiardi,A. DrygajloGaussian mixture models for on-line signature verificationProc. ACM SIGMM Workshop Biometrics Methods Appl., New York, NY, USA, 2003, pp. 115–122.2003
[27]M. LiwickiEvaluation of novel features and different models for online signature verification in a real-world scenarioProc. 14th Conf. Int. Graphonomics Soc., 2009, pp. 22–25.2009
[28]M.I. Malik,S. Ahmed,A. Dengel,M. LiwickiA signature verification framework for digital pen applicationsProc. 10th IAPR Int. Workshop Document Anal. Syst. (DAS), 2012, pp. 419–423.2012
[29]L. Wan,B. Wan,Z.-C. LinOn-line signature verification with two-stage statistical modelsProc. IEEE 8th Int. Conf. Document Anal. Recognit. (ICDAR), Sep. 2005, pp. 282–286.2005
[30]L. Nanni,A. LuminiEnsemble of Parzen window classifiers for on-line signature verificationNeurocomputing, vol. 68, pp. 217–224, Oct. 2005.2005
[31]K. Cpałka,M. Zalasiński,L. RutkowskiNew method for the on-line signature verification based on horizontal partitioningPattern Recognit., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 2652–2661, 2014.2014
[32]K. Cpałka,M. ZalasińskiOn-line signature verification using vertical signature partitioningExpert Syst. Appl., vol. 41, no. 9, pp. 4170–4180, 2014.2014
[33]K. Cpałka,M. Zalasiński,L. RutkowskiA new algorithm for identity verification based on the analysis of a handwritten dynamic signatureAppl. Soft Comput., vol. 43, pp. 47–56, Jun. 2016.2016
[34]K.M. ZalasińskiCpałka, New Algorithm for On-line Signature Verification Using Characteristic Hybrid Partitions2016
[35]J. Fierrez-Aguilar,S. Krawczyk,J. Ortega-Garcia,A.K. JainFusion of local and regional approaches for on-line signature verificationProc. Int. Conf. Adv. Biometric Pers. Authentication, 2005, pp. 188–196.2005
[36]J. Fierrez-Aguilar,L. Nanni,J. Lopez-Pen̋alba,J. Ortega-Garcia,D. MaltoniAn on-line signature verification system based on fusion of local and global informationAudio- Video-Based Biometric Person Authentication, (Series Lecture Notes in Computer Science), T. Kanade, A. Jain, and N. K. Ratha, Eds., Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2005, pp. 523–532.2005
[37]A. Schlapbach,M. Liwicki,H. BunkeA writer identification system for on-line whiteboard dataPattern Recognit., vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 2381–2397, 2008.2008
[38]J. Fierrez-AguilarMCYT baseline corpus: A bimodal biometric databaseIEE Proc. Vis., Image Signal Process., vol. 150, no. 6, pp. 391–401, 2003.2003
[39]D. Muramatsu,T. MatsumotoEffectiveness of pen pressure, Azimuth, and altitude features for online signature verificationAdvances in Biometrics. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2007, pp. 503–512.2007
[40]M.T. Ibrahim,M.A. Khan,K.S. Alimgeer,M.K. Khan,I.A. Taj,L. GuanVelocity and pressure-based partitions of horizontal and vertical trajectories for on-line signature verificationPattern Recognit., vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 2817–2832, 2010.2010
[41]P. Thumwarin,J. Pernwong,T. MatsuuraFIR signature verification system characterizing dynamics of handwriting featuresEURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2013, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2013. 718 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION FORENSICS AND SECURITY, VOL. 12, NO. 3, MARCH 20172013
[42]A. Fischer,M. Diaz,R. Plamondon,M.A. FerrerRobust score normalization for DTW-based on-line signature verificationProc. IEEE 13th Int. Conf. Document Anal. Recognit. (ICDAR), Aug. 2015, pp. 241–245.2015
[43]C. Kahindo,S. Garcia-Salicetti,N. HoumaniA signature complexity measure to select reference signatures for online signature verificationProc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biometrics Special Interest Group (BIOSIG), Sep. 2015, pp. 1–8.2015
[44]L. Nanni,E. Maiorana,A. Lumini,P. CampisiCombining local, regional and global matchers for a template protected on-line signature verification systemExpert Syst. Appl., vol. 37, no. 5, pp. 3676–3684, 2010.2010
[45]E.A. Rua,E. Maiorana,J.L.A. Castro,P. CampisiBiometric template protection using universal background models: An application to online signatureIEEE Trans. Inf. Forensics Security, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 269–282, Feb. 2012.2012
[46]X. Song,X. Xia,F. LuanOnline signature verification based on stable features extracted dynamicallyIEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern., Syst., to be published.0
[47]Y. Liu,Z. Yang,L. YangOnline signature verification based on DCT and sparse representationIEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 45, no. 11, pp. 2498–2511, Dec. 2014.2014
