Improvement of Japanese signature verification by combined segmentation verification approach
Yuta Kamihira,Wataru Ohyama,Tetsushi Wakabayashi,Fumitaka Kimura


I. INTRODUCTION
This paper proposes a new signature verification technique called combined segmentation-verification based on off-line features and on-line features. We use three different off-line feature vectors extracted from full name Japanese signature image and from the sub-images of the first name and the last name. The Mahalanobis distance for each off-line feature vector is calculated for signature verification. The on-line feature based technique employs dynamic programming (DP) matching technique for time series data of the signatures. The final decision (verification) is performed by SVM based on the three Mahalanobis distances and the dissimilarity of the DP matching. In the evaluation test the proposed technique achieved 97.22% verification accuracy with even FRR and FAR, which is 3.95% higher than the best accuracy obtained by the individual technique. This result shows that the proposed combined segmentation verification approach improves Japanese signature verification accuracy significantly.

I. INTRODUCTION
Automatic signature verification, a behavioral biometrics, has been studied by many researchers[1-6]. It can be performed using the scanned signature image or using a tablet with a stylus. The former is called off-line verification and the later is called on-line verification.
On-line verification with the availability of dynamic information such as stroke order, velocity, or local pressure has already had commercial applications. Most of the techniques for the on-line signature verification are based on waveform analysis of time series data in terms of Dynamic Programming (DP) or Hidden Markov Model (HMM) [2,3,4]. However the problems such as accuracy improvement and reduction of required size for training sample are still remaining as the research topicsIn particular, the shape of signature image (off-line features) is not directly employed for its verification while on-line features are focused on. The characteristic of an individuals signature can only be established using an appropriate number of signature specimens. Since human signature could vary overtime, too few samples will increase the false rejection rate of genuine signatures while too many samples will be labor intensive for the user. Therefore, Aiming to solve these problems this paper proposes a new signature verification technique called combined segmentation-verification based on off-line features and on-line features. We use three different off-line feature vectors extracted from full name Japanese signature image and from the sub-images of the first name and the last name. The Mahalanobis distance for each off-line feature vector is calculated for signature verification. The online feature based technique employs dynamic programming (DP) matching technique for time series data of the signatures. The final decision (verification) is performed by SVM based on the three Mahalanobis distances and the dissimilarity of the DP matching.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II describes signature verification techniques using off-line feature (II.A), and the signature verification techniques using on-line feature (II.B), and the combining technique by SVM (II.C). Section III details the experimental settings, results and discussions. Finally, Section IV concludes with future topics.

References
[1]R. Plamondon,G. LoretteAutomatic signature verification and writer identification-The state of the artPattern Recognition, Vol.22, No.2, pp.107-1311989
[2]P. Zhao,A. Higashi,Y. SatoOn-Line Signature Verification by Adaptively Weighted DP MatchingIEICE Trans.Inf.&Syst., Vol.E79-D, No.5, pp.535-5411996
[3]Y. Komiya,T. Ohishi,T. MatsumotoA Pen Input On-Line Signature Verifier Integrating PositionPressure and Inclination Trajectories. IEICE Trans.Inf.&Syst., Vol.E84-D, No.7, pp.833-8382001
[4]J. Fierrez,J. Ortega-Garcia,D Ramos,J. Gonzalez-RodriguezHMMbased on-line signature verification: Feature extraction and signature modelingPattern Recognition Letters, Vol.28, No.16, pp.2325-23342007
[5]I. Nakanishi,N. Nishiguchi,Y. Itoh,Y. FukuiOn-Line Signature Verification Based on Subband Decomposition by DWT and Adaptive Signal ProcessingIEICE Trans.Fundamentals., Vol.J87-A, No.6, pp.805- 8152004
[6]M. Malik,M. Liwicki,L. Alewijnse,W. Ohyama,M. BlumensteinBFound, ICDAR2013 Competitions on Signature Verification and Writer Identification for On- and Offline Skilled Forgeries 2013
[7]T. Wakabayashi,S. Tsuruoka,F. Kimura,Y. MiyakeIncreasing the feature size in handwritten numeral recognition to improve accuracySystems and Computers in Japan, Vol.26, pp.2046-20531995
[8]M. ShiYFujisawa, T.Wakabayashi and F. Kimura, Handwritten numeral recognition using gradient and curvature of gray scale images. Pattern Recognition, Vol.35, pp.2051-20592000
[9]Yumiko Kawazoe,Wataru Ohyama,Tetsushi Wakabayashi,Fumitaka KimuraImprovement of On-line Signature VerificationBased on Gradient Features. ICFHR2010,2010
[10]Yuta Kamihira,Wataru Ohyama,Tetsushi Wakabayashi,Fumitaka KimuraImprovement of Japanese signature verification by segmentation-verificationICDAR2013, pp.379-382,2013
